US President Joe Biden has reaffirmed
Washington's support for Israel a day
after hundreds of Palestinians were
killed in an Israeli strike on a
hospital in Gaza what's behind steadfast
US military and political backing for
Israel this is Inside
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
fully batibo the US has firmly backed
Israel during the war it's launched
against Gaza despite an intensifying
humanitarian crisis for the 2.3 million
Palestinians trapped in the besieged
territory since Israel's foundation in
1948 the US has been its biggest donor
of military aid it's provided funding
and arms in conflicts that have killed
thousands of Palestinians and made
refugees of millions visiting Tel Aviv
US President Joe Biden personally
reassured prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu of continued
support Israel as they respond to these
attacks seems to me that they have to
continue to
ensure that you have what you need to
defend
yourselves and we're going to make sure
that
occurs well Biden arrived in Tel Aviv
just a day after the worst single attack
carried out on Gaza since October the
7th here's what he had to say about the
hospital
strike I was deeply saddened and
outraged by the uh explosion at the
hospital in gazi yesterday and based on
what I've seen it appears as though it
was done by the other team not not you
but there's a lot of people out there
not sure so we got a lot we got to
overcome a lot of
things well before we go to our panel
let's speak to Alan Fischer in Tel Aviv
Alan tell us more about what came out of
this meeting between Biden and Netanyahu
is there any shift at all in the US
position no they're they're fully behind
uh Israel certainly it was Israel's
intention after what happened at the
hospital in Gaza to convince the
Americans that they were not responsible
from Joe Biden's comments it appears
that that wasn't much of a heavy lift
that he'd already decided from what he
was gathering and certainly he has said
that the information he got from the
Pentagon would suggest that the Israelis
were not behind it uh he's talked about
how his support for Israel is steadfast
how they are fully behind what they're
about to do and as far as taking on
Hamas in the Gaza Strip uh certainly he
would like to see some humanitarian Aid
getting into Gaza but what is
interesting is in the past when there
have been conflicts in this area US
presidents have tended to use the word
restraint asking both sides to exercise
it that word has not appeared in any
statement that Joe Biden has made since
he first commented on what happened last
Saturday just hours after the event yeah
it's he's had very little to say about
the Palestinians in those comments how
is this all playing out in the
region well he did say that Hamas was
not uh the Palestinians that they did
not rep present the Palestinians and
he's spoken about innocent people
getting caught up in the fighting but
people are in the region in the Arab
countries are particularly angry that
America seems to have taken uh Israel's
site particularly with the growing
number of bodies piling up in Gaza there
is a concern that he has perhaps been
blinded to the fact of the humanitarian
crisis and isn't doing enough to deter
the Israelis and that could have
long-term implications we certainly saw
there was anger towards Joe Biden when
the three Arab leaders the the president
of Egypt the president of the
Palestinian Authority and surprisingly
the King of Jordan who's a very close us
Ally decided to pull out uh of the
meeting with him that was scheduled in a
man after his visit here to Israel that
shows the level of dissatisfaction they
are with the US response not least the
fact that Joe Biden was not prepared to
call for ceasefire and the Arab leaders
felt that if they did not do that and
were standing next to Joe Biden when he
did not do that they would almost be
complicit in what many people think is
about to happen Alan Fischer in Tel Aviv
thank
[Music]
you let's meet our guests in ramala in
the occupied West Bank we're joined by
Dalal irat assistant professor of
conflict resolution and diplomacy at the
Arab American University dalali is also
a columnist for Al's newspaper in
Washington DC is khed El gindi senior
fellow at the Middle East Institute and
author of blind spot America and the
Palestinians from Baur to Trump and also
in Washington DC Phyllis Bennis a fellow
at The Institute for policy studies
Think Tank and international advisor to
the Jewish voice for peace organization
uh Phyllis let me start with you in
Washington to understand why we've seen
a visit of support by President Biden
uh to Tel Aviv to Israel even after the
massacre at the Al Ali Baptist Hospital
in Gaza even at a time when the region
is boiling why why is the US so
committed in supporting Israel today
that's a very long story and we don't
have time to go into the history but I
think the question today is the
consequences of this visit this be hug
diplomacy that we've seen so far means
that unless there's a public call for a
ceasefire which I do not anticipate we
will see this visit is going to be seen
and should be seen as a real endorsement
of Israel's continuing attack against
Gaza there are likely to be vague
references to uh urging Israel not to
violate international law or expressing
some kind of concern for Palestinian
civilians but the reality is that the
bombing is continuing Gaza is still
under assault and threatened with a uh a
ground Invasion and in that context the
violations of international law are
already underway so what we're seeing
here is as much as anything else based
on us politics Biden is proving once
again his own pro-israel credentials and
this notion of the the extreme
one-sidedness using the the language of
teams is just an expression of that this
is not going to work unless there's a
call for a SE CE fire if he had any hope
of seeing this as winning any level of
support in the region or elsewhere khed
your thoughts an extraordinary show of
support from the Biden administration at
a time when the US should be calling for
restraint and the key word restraint was
missing from those comments in Tel Aviv
restraint is something that previous
administrations have used on calling for
both sides uh to to exercise restraint
in past escalations why has Biden not
done this um uh the uh the it's actually
been quite shocking to me as a as an
analyst who's followed this issue for
for many years the absence of calls for
a ceasefire the inability to articulate
even an expression of uh of basic human
empathy for for
Palestinians uh in addition
to um the the the inability to uh uh to
to urge sort of create red lines uh and
and urge Israel to to show restraint
these are all things that had had
previously been uh fairly standard uh uh
elements of of US policy in times of
Crisis um even going back to the the
second uh inala during the height of the
violence at a time when Hamas was
blowing up uh weddings and
pizzerias the us officials even the
president at the time was was able to uh
to I
identify um uh red lines uh and urge
Israel to exercise restraint we're not
seeing any of that right now and the the
danger of course uh of giving Israel an
effective green light is that we're
likely to see more U more death and
destruction why why why do you think
we're not seeing that right now are
domestic politics also at play here with
the election coming up next to
you I it's domestic politics sure but
it's also the the person of Joe Biden
he's deeply personally very committed uh
to Israel he's expressed that many times
and and I think it's sincere and I I
don't believe that he's just pandering
of course it it doesn't hurt uh in terms
of domestic politics um uh but but there
there there is a there's a real um
inability to to see not just
Palestinians and their suffering but
even in terms of the long-term
consequences of this I mean if you look
at this rationally maybe too rationally
uh and imagine well the the the the
extraordinary pain and Trauma that
Palestinians are experiencing right now
and the anger that that will turn into
uh it's hard to see how anyone would
imagine that this scale of of death and
destruction in Gaza would ever uh bring
anything like security for Israel so
there's a kind of suspension even of the
ability to to reason in the long Dalal
let me get your thoughts on this why why
and what do you make of this
unconditional us support for Israel we
heard Biden say in Tel Aviv that he
would continue to work with Partners
across the region but do they want to
work with him does Biden's Embrace of
Israel set him on a collision course
with Arab
leaders well I think what we had just
seen is another example of um the US
shielding Israeli war crimes against the
Palestinian people last night everybody
has watched a massacre against 500
Palestinian civilians mostly children
and women the least we had expected from
Mr Biden today was a condemnation of the
state organized Terror by by Israel as
so as long as the US continues to reward
the Israeli war crimes against the
Palestinian people the Israelis will
continue with impunity massacring the
Palestinians one more thing that we have
to focus on today the framing Biden had
tried to mislead the audiences in
supporting the Israeli narrative by
saying that this is friendly Palestinian
fire I want to remind you of Sharin
abu's murder when they massacred Shan
Abu they said they had evidence it is
friendly fire we didn't see any evidence
when they labeled six Palestinian human
rights organizations as terrorists they
said we have evidence the Israelis
always try to spin the realities they
want to mislead the audiences this is
the message the Palestinians in Gaza are
being massacred genocide war crimes
force displacements and everything is
documented we are living 2023 the whole
world is watching diplomacy had failed
the Palestinian civilians in Gaza 2.2
million Palestinians 50% our children 1
million children are deprived from water
medicine food electricity while the
International Community is watching the
International Community has an
obligation under article 146 of the
force Geneva Convention
they have to search for the criminals
and hold them accountable in their
crimes the Palestinian civilians are
entitled to protection under under
article 49 of the for Geneva conventions
the UN has an obligation to enforce
humanitarian Aid to the Palestinians
besides ceasefire and the protection of
the civilians dala let me come back to
my question and and you are right the
Americans have said that their national
team would look into the explosion at
the hospital but it seems that President
Biden has already made his mind up as to
who's responsible he said the other team
in his words coming back to my question
Dalal what about Arab leaders we've seen
them snub Biden cancel the meeting that
was scheduled in Jordan will this uh
posturing and position by the US leader
put put him in a collision course now
with the Arab
world listen when I when I remind the
world leaders of their obligations under
the for Geneva conventions the Arab
leers are also included the Palestinians
have gone into a 30 years peace process
a sugarcoated peace process for 75 years
for God's sake we have have been
suffering injustices enduring the
injustices under upper th extrajudicial
killings detentions confiscations of
lands settlements and settler terror
terror all under the package of a
prolonged Israeli military occupation we
need to address the root causes of the
reality that we are witnessing continued
series of war crimes are being
documented on every screen it is time
that every leader every member state of
the UN needs to invoke article 25 every
country is now obliged to act upon their
words and the security Cil resolutions
and the general assembly resolutions by
granting the Palestinians there the
Palestinian people have a right to
self-determination a right to defense
and a right to resistance yet what we
are seeing what we are witnessing hold
on hold on please this is a translation
of the deal of the century in the Middle
East we are witnessing a change of the
geopolitics map at the expense of the
Palestinian blood they are eting the
Palestinian people to the house to siai
and then the scenario of the settler
Colonial project will continue to the
West Bank in the hopes of eliminating
the Palestinian cause this war is not
against Hamas it's not against Gaza it's
against the Palestinian cause against
the Palestinian people we have a right
and everybody should stand for their own
obligations philis your thoughts about
what Dalal just said there uh and and
the US position is it likely to ever
shift or are we going to continue to see
this bipartisan policy towards uh Israel
in Washington DC for a long time it's
been the case there was somewhat of a
blip under the the Obama administration
because he didn't have good relations
with Netanyahu but it seems that it
doesn't matter who's in the White House
the policy stays the same the policy has
been consistent for many many decades
the so-called special relationship
between the US and Israel that began
around the time of the 1967 War began as
a military relationship and morphed into
the broad-based political diplomatic
economic uh and political as well as
military relationship we see now the
United States taxpayers are paying
paying 20% of the entire Israeli
military budget I think there is one
thing we have to keep in mind about this
question of a ceasefire what is most
desperately needed right now what we are
hearing from all Palestinians across
across Palestine across the diaspora
everywhere is an immediate ceasefire we
have to recognize the US has a history
of rejecting ceasefires when there are
international calls for a ceasefire when
Israel is involved this goes back to
2006 in the Lebanon war in cast lead
against Gaza in 2008 and9 in
2014 again in 2021 in each of these
instances when Israel was at War as they
defined it meaning they were attacking
Palestinians there was a call for a
ceasefire and the US answer again and
again we don't need a ceasefire yet
meaning not enough people have been
killed yet we're facing that same
problem now and the challenge of facing
people who are protesting today in
Washington who are out in the streets on
Monday will be again on Friday is to
demand an immediate ceasefire to break
that refusal to call for a ceasefire on
all sides an immediate ceasefire right
nowed your thoughts and what's happened
khed to the voices of Progressive
Democrats in Congress who want the US to
take a harder line with Israel over its
military assault on Gaza what's happened
to
them well I I think uh I think those
voices have uh almost entirely been
silenced uh in in large part because of
the the initial attack in Israel by
Hamas the the horror of it and the scale
of it uh has has really uh silenced
people who might have otherwise been uh
more critical of of how Israel has
conducted itself uh we're starting to
see some push back now there there are
more calls from Democrats uh for for a
ceasefire which uh seems reasonable but
part of the problem here I mean this
goes beyond the United States uh most
western Nations have also failed to call
for a ceasefire um that's different than
in the past where you know as Phyllis
mentioned it was usually the United
States kind of blocking or dragging
their feet on a ceasefire but they were
usually alone now there is a kind of
chorus of of Western Powers showing um
unrestrained solidarity and support and
unconditional uh endorsement really of
of what Israel is doing on the ground in
Gaza and to me that's even more shocking
uh because essentially everyone is being
ruled by emotions and there are no you
know quote unquote grown-ups anywhere
who who are able to see the the the
horrible uh human costs uh of of what's
happening but but even the medium and
long-term repercussions of of
serious uh erosion if not destruction of
Western
credibility as a whole with regard to
anything resembling a rules-based order
I think it will be impossible for not
only Palestinians but Arabs Africans
Latin Americans Asians um ever to take
uh the us or European nations seriously
when they talk about human rights or
international law or or any of those
things that have been completely thrown
out the window in this case Dalal your
thoughts about this as yes go ahead
Phyllis go ahead phis before I bring in
just one point on what khed was just
saying which I think is so important
just coming back to the US side it is
important to recognize there has been
now a uh an official resolution
introduced into the Congress calling
directly for a ceasefire very carefully
framed to not try and win over views of
what started at whose fault just calling
for an immediate ceasefire that now has
I think 13 uh co-signers and it reflects
the fact that there has been a movement
focused on changing the narrative
changing the discourse in this country
which has led to a situation where as of
about two weeks ago the the most recent
polls were indicating that 25% of
American Jews 38% of young Jews believe
that Israel is an apartheid state that's
because there's been a movement
mobilized
with the Press with Congress at with the
public for 25 years now and we're seeing
that there's a threat to that
accomplishment but right now I think it
still exists and we're seeing public
levels of support for Palestinians even
now despite the incredible levels of
terrible press yeah it is true that it
would appear that more Americans are
warming to the Palestinian cause
according to the latest Gallop pole um
Dal let me come to you now uh as uh said
yeah as khed said things go far beyond
the US of course away from the US today
is there a single country that
could uh be a fair broker here call for
a ceasefire that would be respected
agreed to by Israel and be a fan honest
broker in this
conflict let's remind the American
public that this is an accumulative
reflection of their 3.8 billion annual
Aid of military aid to the to to Israel
the war crimes that are being committed
against 2.2 million Palestinian
civilians living in a big prison of 365
Kil kilometers mostly children you know
I want to also remember and and ask the
Jewish American organizations for their
voices I want to call upon all academics
University the Harvard School of
negotiations Scholars where are the
people who work for peace studies and
conflict resolution I am a professor of
diplomacy we have failed our students
you know I have looked into the UN un
Charter the international law the
international humanitarian law the for
Geneva conventions the Roman statute I
couldn't find one article that supports
waiting for a permission from the
occupier to let in humanitarian Aid what
is the International Community waiting
for why don't they send drones send the
humanitarian assistance and protection
for the Palestinian civilians two
million Palestinian civilians are being
massacred on the screens and the whole
world is watching diplomacy had failed
Humanity diplomacy had failed the
Palestinian cause it is time we speak
the truth please do not adopt the
Israeli narrative anymore they are
misleading the audience it's about time
in 2023 to speak the truth to tell the
stories of the injustices and the
endurance of Injustice that the
Palestinian people have been enduring
for 75 years let alone the 16 years of
total deadly blockade on Gaza it's about
time we recognize the gazans as human
beings Gaza is Palestine this is not a
war between Israel and Hamas this is not
against Gaza not against Hamas this is
against the palestin runout to
self-determination this is a translation
of the deal of the century at the
expense of the Palestinian blood this is
again also part of the electoral process
campaigns of Biden and Netanyahu coming
in the next year all right khed what are
your thoughts about what Dalal just said
there she says diplomacy has failed has
it is there still room you think to to
get a ceasefire here and is there a
country as I asked a loud that could
step in today and and uh take that role
of a fair and honest broker in this
conflict which the US has been
criticizing of not
being uh unfortunately no I don't see
any uh Power that that could play that
role I mean but but yes there there is
hope for a a ceasefire there there has
to be I mean obviously that th this uh
this death and destruction can't
continue indefinitely although it can
continue for quite a long time and and
that's why I was saying um how alarming
it is that there aren't any don't seem
to be any reasonable rational people in
the Diplomatic world who can see that
who can see the dangers not just of you
know certainly at a humanitarian level
of of uh the just given the scale of the
attack and in all forms and it's very
clearly directed at civilians in Gaza
but what really alarms me is the total
inability uh to to see how this will uh
impact any f future process um I don't
see any political process happening um
anytime soon but but let me one other
point because uh I think it's important
to to mention the the role of
Palestinian leadership you know one of
the things that history tells us the
Palestinian people know this better than
anyone else because of their history is
when they don't have a credible
leadership very bad things happen to
Palestinians think of 1948 think of
1967 and I'm sorry to say right now part
of the problem that we have in addition
to the abdication of responsibility by
the Western world uh is the absence of a
credible Palestinian leadership that can
advocate for Palestinians on the world
stage and that can seek uh uh you know
diplomatic opportunities uh right now we
have a failed leadership both in Gaza
and I'm afraid to say in the West Bank
okay let me ask Dalal about that before
I bring in phis Dalal says the absence
of a fail of a Palestinian leadership
has also contributed to the predicament
that Palestinians find themselves in
today well it's about time we go for our
Unity it's about time we go for
unific reconciliation and to end our
division my my call to the Palestinian
leadership of all different political
factions is to un unite now because this
had been a pretext this has been the Fig
Le Bel that has been used against us
from the International Community again
they are looking at us and saying
they're not worthy of a Palestinian
State they are not worthy of um
Independence and and recognition and
this is a setback on the internal level
that I recognize however we need to look
at 12 days of massacres and war crimes
of genocide and forced displacement as
war crimes which are being treated with
total impunity by the International
Community 2.2 million Palestinian
civilians are suffering under the
Israeli fire and you know the company
boing it's American company the the the
military aid of money from the from the
US that is pouring into into Israel this
is again an international legal coverage
for the war crimes that are documented
on the screens being perpetrated against
the Palestinian people and and civilian
and this should not be accepted this
should not be tolerated and this is not
only in Gaza in the past week we had we
had had more than 60 Martyrs in the West
Bank this means that every Palestinian
is Target no matter what you believe no
matter your ideology no matter your
color Israel is targeting every single
Palestinian Israel is waging a war
against truth whoever whoever tries to
tell the truth about about Israel and
its war crimes is being targeted philis
your thoughts about what happens next
year and and has President Biden given
the green light to Israel now to do
whatever it wants in uh Gaza I think
whatever whatever President Biden says
the the image of his be hug diplomacy is
seen as a green light for Israel to do
what it wants to continue these
incredible violations of international
law crimes against humanity that are
being committed I think that we have to
be looking for where there might be
calls for uh ceasefire that can come
from elsewhere not from as khed said not
from the US not from the Europeans right
now Brazil is chairing Brazil is the the
president of the security Council Don
are you hopeful that a ceas fire could
be reached in the next few days I I hope
so however
it is really sad that while we are
waiting for a ceasefire and that we are
waiting for Action a diplomatic action
millions of Palestinians are perishing
and women and children are deprived from
water from milk from medicine the
hospitals the doctors are operating in
the hallways without electricity and
without Anastasia we are witnessing a
human historic catastrophe which is
documented on the screen and let us be
clear yesterday's hospital is an
Anglican hospital and King Charles is a
that is the head of the Anglican Church
what did he do we need to hear it from
the UK we need to hear it from the US we
need to hear it from every leader it is
not okay that hospitals are being
targeted that people are being eved and
war crimes are being documented while
everybody is watching humanity is at
risk and we have all failed the humanity
it's about time we see Palestinians as a
human beings thank you all thank you to
all three of you for a great discussion
Dalal erat khed elgindi and Philly
spenis thank you for joining us on
Inside Story and thank you too for
watching you can always watch this
program again anytime by visiting our
website at Al ja.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's facebook.com/ AJ insidestory and
of course you can join the conversation
on X our handle is at AJ inside story
from me FY bti boy and the whole team
here in Doha thanks for watching bye for
[Music]
now